The field of synthetic biology has three enablers that helped it emerge and develop rapidly: computational modelling, DNA sequencing and DNA synthesis.
Synthetic biology, not unlike systems biology, relies heavily on computational modelling. It helps in the design and prediction of a system prior to fabrication. Synthetic biology can therefore be considered to be the application of certain systems biology techniques. However, synthetic biology lacks the software the like are available to a systems biologist, such as an integrated development environment (IDE) to aid in designing synthetic biological systems.
The quantitative measurement of biological parameters obtained through systems biology is an essential to accurately design synthetic biological devices and systems. On the other hand, synthetic biology can prove especially useful in substantiating hypotheses developed by systems biology, as these hypotheses can be tested in a much more controlled system.
DNA sequencing, or the reading of DNA, is the second enabler for synthetic biology. DNA comprises of four bases: A, T, C and G. A always pairs with T, and C always pairs with G. A pair of two bases is called a base pair. All DNA of a particular organism is called its genome. Sequencing an entire organism’s genome provides researchers with a wealth of data. Sequencing can also be used to verify that engineered sections of DNA have been fabricated correctly.
DNA synthesis is the process of writing, or synthesising, DNA. This is the third key enabler of synthetic biology. There is commercial activity around strands of DNA of about 100 to 1000 base pairs, either constructed by combining bioparts or by synthesising the pairs directly. The typical cost of fabricating strands of DNA have dropped significantly over the years, and are currently around 55 cents per base pair. At present there is a technological barrier around the cost and speed of synthesising, which would have to be removed to make the design process loop in synthetic biology commercially viable.
Another challenge is synthesising chromosomes of mammals. In bacteria the DNA strands are circular (plasmids) and consist of about tens of thousands of base pairs. In mammals, DNA lies in packed in chromosomes which each contain millions of base pairs. These chromosomes are much harder to produce than plasmids.
The yields of synthesised DNA sequences decrease dramatically the longer the sequence is. The longer a strand, the more prone it is to sequencing errors. The theoretical yields of a 20, 100, 200 and 1000 base pair strand of DNA respectively are 90%, 50%, 35% and 5%. To increase the yields the industry requires the development of new techniques, which is ongoing.
Apart from computational modelling, DNA sequencing and DNA synthesis a number of additional tools are used which are important to the development of synthetic biology. A chassis is a host cell for the synthesized DNA. It’s important the chassis be genetically simple. One of the most used natural chassis is the Escherichia coli or E. coli bacterium. It can be grown easily and has relatively simple genetics. Other common chassis are B. subtilis, Mycoplasma, Yeast and P. putida. An alternative approach to natural chassis is to create minical cells. The basic idea behind minimal cells is to produce a cell which has the minimum number of components required to support biological synthesis from synthetic DNA circuits or genomes, whilst being as simple as possible in order to achieve adequate control of its function.
A key part in synthetic biology is determining the minimal genome for sustaining cell life. Synthesizing a minimal cell is key for many hypothesis in replication and its subsystems. The model is to be created in a tube, in vitro. Because a minimal cell is highly complex, some of the subsystems would be substituted. If the model turns out to be a poor model for the more complex in vivo system,  the model can be made more complex.
To determine the minimal set of genes for a self-replicating system we can try to search for genes that have homologs in the genomes of groups of organisms. A challenge here is that over long evolutionary distances genes have replaced each other and a third of the essential genes have unknown functions. Genetics search for essential genes by mutating one gene at the time. Some genes will be falsely marked essential because the mutation mutilates neighboring genes or creates a new complex structure. Finally there is biochemistry which identifies from cell fraction those gene products essential for the reconstruction of biochemical reactions. So far this yielded the best results.
By reconstituting the catalysts that synthesize DNA, RNA and protein, an MCP may be realized. Since lipids can be used to act as simple membranes, this draft is a major milestone.
Another method entirely is a cell free approach. In this strategy, only biochemical extracts containing the components necessary to operate the synthetic DNA circuit are employed. This method offers more control of the synthetic device as the normal processes of the cell won’t interfere with the intended processes.

